--- 
title: 1803.11173 Notes 
--- 

# Barren plateaus in quantum neural network training landscapes 

I **need** to read the [original VQE paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1509.04279.pdf). 

Variational algorithms are resistant to noise. I don't really understand this 
part; the paper to really understand in order to get a feel for this topic is 
[1603.05681]({% link _qc/1603.05681.md %}). 

Variational methods usually rely on "optimizing a unitary circuit with respect 
to an objective function that is a sum of Pauli operators or fidelity". I think 
this means an objective function that is based on measurement values of sums of 
Pauli operators. 

Papers about informed ansatze: 
- [Training a Quantum Optimizer](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1605.05370.pdf) 
- [Exploiting Locality in Quantum Computation for Quantum Chemsitry](https://dash.harvard.edu/bitstream/handle/1/27692608/Exploiting%20Locality%20in%20Quantum.pdf?sequence=1)
- [Strategies for quantum computing molecular energies using the unitary coupled cluster ansatz](https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.02691) 
- [Low-Depth Quantum Simulation of Materials](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/323927159_Low-Depth_Quantum_Simulation_of_Materials) 
- [Application of fermionic marginal constraints to hybrid quantum algorithms](https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.03524) 
- [Quantum Simulation of Electronic Structure with Linear Depth and Connectivity](https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.04789) 

Another common method is to use random circuits of varying depth as ansatz. 

In the quantum case, the estimation of even a single gradient component scales 
as $O(1 / \epsilon^\alpha )$ for some small $\alpha$, see [Optimal Quantum 
Measurements of Expectation Values of Observables](https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0607019)
, whereas classically the same is achieved in $O(\log (1/\epsilon))$ time. 

There's a figure that talks about concentration of measure in quantum space 
(the faction of states that fall outside a fixed angular distance from 0 along 
any coordinate) decreases exponentially in the number of qubits. SOURCE is 
*The Concentration of Measure Phenomenon* by Michel Ledoux page 89. 

The paper shows that for many random circuits, the average value of the gradient 
of the objective function is 0, and probability of deviating from this is 
exponentially small in number of qubits. 

This can be understood in the geometric context of concentration of measure 
for high dimensional spaces: 
- [Entanglement and the foundation of statistical mechanics](https://people.physics.anu.edu.au/~tas110/Teaching/Lectures/L5/Material/Popescu06.pdf) 
- [Are random pure states useful for quantum computation?](https://arxiv.org/abs/0812.3001v1) 
- [Most quantum states are too entangled to be useful as computational resources](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=%E2%80%9CMost+quantum+states+are+too+entangled+to+be+useful+as+computational+resources%2C%E2%80%9D&t=brave&ia=web) 

When the measure of the space concentrates in this way, the value of any 
reasonably smooth function will tend to its average with exponential 
probability, by Levy's lemma (same textbook source). This means the gradient 
is zero over vast reaches of quantum space. 

The regions where the gradient is 0 aren't local minima but are states with 
exponentially small deviations in the objective value from average totally 
mixed state. 

The depth of circuits which achieve these undesirable properties are modest; 
we only need $O(n^{1/d})$ depth circuits on a $d$ dimensional array. 

## Gradient concentration in random circuits 

A random parameterized quantum circuit: 
\\[ U(\overrightarrow{\theta}) = U(\theta\_1, \cdots, \theta\_L ) = 
\prod\_{l=1}^L U\_l (\theta\_l) W\_l \\]

where $U\_l (\theta\_l) = \exp (-i \theta\_l V\_l)$; $V\_l$ is Hermitian; and 
$W\_l$ is a generic unitary that doesn't depend on angle $\theta\_l$. 

We choose this form so we can evaluate the gradient easily for most objective 
functions. This form has also been introduced in: 
- [Strategies for quantum computing molecular energies using the unitary coupled cluster ansatz](https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.02691)
- [Practical optimization for hybrid quantum-classical algorithms](https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.01450) 

If we have an objective function $E(\theta)$ expressible as the expectation of 
some Hermitian $H$, 
\\[ E( \overrightarrow{\theta} ) = \bra{0} U(\overrightarrow{\theta})^{\dagger} 
HU(\overrightarrow{\theta}) \ket{0} \\]

(Okay the above makes sense.) When the RPQCs are parameterized like this, the 
gradient is: 
\\[ \partial\_k E \equiv \frac{\partial E( \overrightarrow{\theta} )}{\partial 
\theta\_k} = i \bra{0} U^{\dagger}\_{-} \Big[ V\_k, U\_+^\dagger H 
U\_+ \Big] U\_- \ket{0} \\]
where we introduce 
\\[ U\_- \equiv \prod\_{l=0}^{k-1} U\_l (\theta\_l ) W\_l \\]
and 
\\[ U\_+ \equiv \prod\_{l=k}^L U\_l (\theta\_l) W\_l \\]

We also define the RPQC $U ( \overrightarrow{\theta} )$ such that for any 
gradient direction $\partial\_k E$, the circuit implementing 
$U( \overrightarrow{\theta} )$ is sufficiently random such that either $U\_-$, 
$U\_+$, or both match the Haar distribution up to the second moment, and the 
circuits $U\_-$ and $U\_+$ are independent. 

We use the Haar measure on the unitary group $d \mu(U)$, which is the unique 
left- and right-invariant measure such that 
\\[ \int\_{U(N)} d\mu(U) f(U) = \int d\mu(U) f(VU) = \int d\mu(U) f(UV) \\]
for any $f(U)$ and $V \in U(N)$. 

This is useful for proofs, but quantum circuits which exactly achieve this 
require exponential resources, so we introduce unitary $t$-designs, which 
satisfy the above properties for restricted classes of $f(U)$, usually 
requiring only polynomial resources. 
- [Symmetric Informationally Complete Quantum Measurements](https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0310075) 
- [Exact and approximate unitary 2-designs and their applications to fidelity estimation](https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~cleve/pubs/2009TwoDesigns.pdf) 
- [Random Quantum Circuits are Approximate 2-designs](https://arxiv.org/abs/0802.1919)

Suppose $\{ p\_i, V\_i \}$ is an ensemble of unitary operators sampled with some 
probability. This ensemble is a $t$-design if 
\\[ \sum\_i p\_i V\_i^{\otimes t} \rho (V\_i^\dagger)^{\otimes t} = \int d\mu 
(U) U^{\otimes t} \rho (U^\dagger)^{\otimes t} \\]

This is equivalent to the property that if $f(U)$ is a polynomial of at most 
degree $t$ in the matrix elements of $U^*$, then averaging over the $t$-design 
will yield the same result as averaging over the unitary group with respect to 
the Haar measure. 

### Gradient 

The average value of the gradient is a concept that requires additional 
specification because, for a given point, the gradient can only be defined in 
terms of the circuit that led to that point. 

We will use a practical definition that gives the value we're interested in, 
namely: 
\\[ \langle \partial\_k E \rangle = \int dUp(U) \partial\_k \bra{0} U 
(\overrightarrow{\theta})^\dagger HU(\overrightarrow{\theta}) \ket{0} \\]
where $p(U)$ is probability distribution function (?) of $U$. 

A review I'll need to read: [Products of Independent Gaussian Random Matrices](https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.06128). 

Our assumption of independence and at least one of $U\_-, U\_+$ forming a 
1-design in our RPQCs implies $\langle \partial\_k E \rangle = 0$. 

### Appendix Proof

Here we show expectation of gradient is 0 and that variance decays exponentially 
in number of qubits. 

The main source for the following computations is [Symbolic integration with respect to the Haar measure on the unitary group](https://arxiv.org/abs/1109.4244). 

We know that for any direction $\partial\_k E$, both $U\_-, U\_+$ are 
independently distributed and either $U\_-$ or $U\_+$ match the Haar distribution 
up to at least the second moment (since they are a 2-design). 

The assumption of independence is equivalent to: 
\\[ p(U) = \int dU\_+ p(U\_+) \int dU\_- p(U\_-) \times \delta(U\_+ U\_- - U) \\] 
which lets us rewrite (?) as 
\\[ \langle \partial\_k E \rangle = i \int dU\_- p(U\_-) \mathrm{Tr} \Big\\{ \rho\_- 
\times \int dU\_+ p(U\_+) \big[ V, U\_+^\dagger H U\_+ \big] \Big\\} \\]

Using explicit integration over the unitary group from the source above with 
respect to the Haar measure, up to the first moment is 

\\[ \int d\mu (U) U\_{ij} U\_{km}^\dagger = \int d\mu (U) U\_{ij} U\_{mk}^\* 
= \frac{\delta\_{im} \delta\_{jk}}{N} \\]
where $N$ is dimension, usually $2^n$ for $n$ qubits. This means that 
\\[ M = \int d\mu (U) UOU^\dagger = \frac{\mathrm{Tr} O}{N} I \\]

Now, using our assumption that $U\_+$ or $U\_-$ matches the Haar measure up to 
the first moment (they're 1-design), we first examine the case wehre $U\_-$ is 
at least a 1-design: 
\\[ \langle \partial\_k E \rangle = i \int d\mu (U\_-) \mathrm{Tr} \Big\\{ 
\rho\_- \times \big[ V, \int dU\_+ p(U\_+) U\_{+}^\dagger HU\_+ \big] \Big\\} = 
\frac{i}{N} \mathrm{Tr} \Big[ V, \int dU\_+ p(U\_+ )U\_{+}^\dagger HU\_+ \Big] = 0 \\]

where we define $\rho\_- = U\_- \ket{0} \bra{0} U\_{-}^\dagger$. We used the 
fact that trace of a commutator of trace class operators is 0. 

The second case is when $U\_+$ is at least a 1-design: 
\\[ \langle \partial\_k E \rangle = i \int dU\_- p(U\_-) \mathrm{Tr} \Big\\{ 
\rho\_- \int d\mu(U\_+) \big[ V, U\_{+}^\dagger HU\_+ \big] \Big\\} = i 
\frac{\mathrm{Tr}H}{N} \int dU\_- p(U\_-) \mathrm{Tr} \Big\\{ \rho\_- \big[ 
V, I \big] \Big\\} = 0 \\]

An advantage of the explicit polynomial formulas is that they allow an analytic 
calculation of the variance which allows precise specification of the coefficient 
in Levy's lemma. If the integrals depend on up to two powers of elements in $U$ 
and $U^\*$, we can use the elementwise formula from source: 
\\[ \int d\mu(U) U \cdots OH LORD THERE"S A LOT \\]

Since we know $\langle \partial\_k E \rangle = 0$, the variance is defined by 
$\mathrm{Var} ( \partial\_k E) = \langle ( \partial\_k E )^2 \rangle$. 

Using the above elementwise formula for integrating up to second moment of the 
Haar distribution, we evaluate in 3 cases. 

Case 1: $U\_-$ is a 2-design but not $U\_+$: 

\\[ \mathrm{Var}(\partial\_k E) = \frac{2 \mathrm{Tr} (\rho^2)}{N^2} 
\mathrm{Tr} \langle H\_{u}^2 V^2 - (H\_u V)^2 \rangle\_{U\_+} = - \frac{ 
\mathrm{Tr} (\rho^2)}{2^{2n}} \mathrm{Tr} \langle [V, H\_u ]^2 \rangle\_{U\_-} \\]
where $H\_u = u^\dagger H u$ and $\langle f(u) \rangle\_{U\_x}$ means the 
average over $u$ sampled from $p(U\_x)$. 

Case 2: $U\_+$ is a 2-design but not $U\_-$: 

\\[ \mathrm{Var} (\partial\_k E) = \frac{2\mathrm{Tr} (H^2)}{N^2} \mathrm{Tr} 
\langle \rho\_{u}^2 V^2 - (\rho\_u V)^2 \rangle\_{U\_-} = - \frac{\mathrm{Tr} 
(H^2)}{2^{2n}} \mathrm{Tr} \langle [V, \rho\_u]^2\rangle\_{U\_-} \\]

where $\rho\_u = u \rho u^\dagger$. 

Case 3: Both $U\_+, U\_-$ are 2-designs: 

\\[ \mathrm{Var} (\partial\_k E) = 2 \mathrm{Tr} (H^2) \mathrm{Tr} (\rho^2) 
\Big( \frac{\mathrm{Tr}(V^2)}{2^{3n}} - \frac{\mathrm{Tr} (V)^2}{2^{4n}} \Big) \\]

In all cases, exponential decay with respect to qubits is clear. 

### Graphs 

Sample variance of gradient of $H = \ket{00...0} \bra{00...0}$ exponentially 
decays as a function of number of qubits. 

Sample variance of gradient of $H = \ket{00...0} \bra{00...0}$ converges to 
a fixed value determined by number of qubits. 

### Done with Calculation of Gradient 

Levy's lemme intuits expected variance through geometric arguments. Haar random 
unitaries on $n$ qubits will output states uniformly in $2^n -1$ dimensional 
hyperspace. The derivative wrt parameters $\theta$ is Lipschitz continuous with 
some parameter $\eta$ that depends on operator $H$. Levy's lemma implies 
variance of measurements will decrease exponentially in number of qubits. 

This variance depends on polynomials of degree 2 in $U$ and polynomials of degree 
2 of $U^\*$. 

While a unitary 2-design will exhibit correct variance, a unitary 
1-design will exhibit correct average variance but not necessarily variance. 
- "Exact and approximate unitary 2-designs and their application to fidelity estimation" paper. 
- [Chaos and complexity by design](https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.04903) 

So, if a circuit is of sufficient depth that for any $\partial\_k E$, either 
$U\_-, U\_+, $ or both form 2-designs, then with high probability we'll 
produce an ansatz on a barren plateau with no interesting search directions 
in sight. 

## Numerical Simulation
