---
title: Building a Moat
permalink: /posts/moat
---

# How to build a moat 

It's probably a good idea to look at what software companies have already built moats. 
- Google has one on search but they don't seem satisfied with that. They're making tablets and phones too. 
- Amazon has one on e-commerce but they're branching out into media too. Amazon's a company that seems fully profit-motivated to the point that they're bordering on unethical  {% annotate please start at 1 %}
- Airbnb has one on vacation housing. They don't seem to be branching out probably because they have to do a lot of work to maintain a global monopoly in something that is so local. 
- Tesla has one for electric cars. They seem to have gotten that because people love Elon and everyone thinks Tesla's electric cars are the best. Wait this isn't software. 

I need to make a bigger list that goes way in depth. One trend I'm noticing now, which probably is only representative of the biggest companies, is a parallel to Gladwell's idea that the most successful people put in their 10,000 hours into a skill right before that skill becomes insanely valuable so that they're poised to be the best at it. These companies seemed to be doing well and making great products and then a new trend or realization brought a huge influx of users to them in some exponential way. 

If we constrain ourselves to a "local" app like Uber, how do we get a monopoly?

Okay so let's look at what's wrong with Uber first. 
- they have a different significant competitor in many different countries 

How do we avoid this?  What's wrong with Uber that isn't wrong with Airbnb? The main consensus is that Airbnb is advantaged by a global market because someone who uses Airbnb in America might want to book a room in another country. But this can't the vast majority of bookings. Rijkard said Airbnb has some huge competitor in India that just blows it away. 

Okay but even if this isn't linear with Airbnb's customers, it could still give them a huge head start on any other competitor. Uber's problem is that a customer in the US probably won't need the app to be popular in some other country, or even some other state within the US. It's entirely local. So to get past this, we need some way to win with local apps or make a local app global. 

## Win with local companies: 

Grow faster than everyone else. How do you grow faster? Have a better product, get it in front of people faster, get people to want to use it more than any other product. Getting people to want to use it more than any other product simplifies to have a better product. So we simplify to have an amazing product and grow exponentially. 

It **has** to be exponential growth - any other growth is easily taken over. The coefficient of an  exponential doesn't matter as time goes to infintiy. 

Okay having an amazing product means great engineering and innovative design. Fine, that's on me - I can put thought into this once it becomes the bottleneck. 

The bigger problem is how do we grow faster than any other possible startup? If we're serious about this, Zuckerberg said one of the most important things he did at FB was creating a growth team. We can do that later. But is it even possible to grow at an exponential rate? What key things are necessary for growth like that? 

Let's try to go for 5% growth every week. If we hit this, in 52 weeks we'll have 12.5x the number of customers we started with. Assume we start with 100 customers. We have to find a way to get the following growth: 
1. 100 
2. 105
3. 110 
4. 115
5. 121 
6. 127
7. 134
8. 141
9. 148
10. 155
11. 163
12. 171
13. 180
14. 188
15. 198
16. 208
17. 219
18. 229
19. 240
20. 253

## Turn a local business into a global one

I don't think I'm interested in doing this. Just getting UCR to use the app can net us more than $2.5 million. 
